---
layout: post
title: Small actions change systems
description: A keynote by Dave Snowden
image: assets/images/stepping-stones.jpg
---



<i class="fa-brands fa-youtube"></i> <a href=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MsLmjoAp_Dg>Dave Snowden: How leaders change culture through small actions</a>

How do you work from where you are rather than where you'd like to be?
We should start to deal with our day-to-day rather than ask how we would like things to be in five years time.

## Understanding and managing the present to set a new direction of travel
is more important than creating expectations about how things could be in a few years time.

small stepping stones for a complex system to move from the present state to adjacent possibles - but in the right direction.
Describe the present and see what you can change, rather than define ideal future state and try to close the gap. Define a direction of travel, not a goal.
When you start the journey, you'll discover things that you didn't know before, but that have high utility. If you set an explicit goal, it's very likely
you'll miss those things you need to discover. <i class="fa-solid fa-paperclip"></i> <a href=https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613479386">We do not see what we do not expect to see</a>. 

Weak signal detection, <i class="fa-brands fa-youtube"></i> <a href=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dP-5USKyQ10>collective mindfulness practices</a>

## Theory-informed practice

What does natural science say about people and systems, what constraints does that imply how does that allow us to invent sustainable and effective practice
for social change?

## Giving people a voice to tell their story - and the power to explain what those stories mean

hand over power of interpretation from the experts to participants (depending on context e.g. patients, employees, citizens, parents...)
distributed ethnography

evidence that persuades politicians to change - a lot of 'evidence' has the values and beliefs of those running the survey baked into it.

find the minority views before they have a chance to talk to the others (radiologist example). Present a situation to a lot of agents that are
as independent from each other as possible, then have them interpret and explain what the situation means, then hear the different views.

## The role of ritual for cognitive activation

We do a first-match pattern search, not a best-match. We favor our most recent experience.

You launch a new initiative: people scan a very small amount of what is said/presented to them, and match it against their recent experience with "initiatives".

In highly ritualized contexts, checklists work, order can be imposed and is very useful (e.g. operating theatre). The entry into a specific space enables behavioral patterns
and routines that are not possible outside the space. Need to understand context before we imitate practice.

overconstrain the system and people will find ways to work around the system.

## Exaptation

Under stress, a trait evolved for one function suddenly is used/tried for another purpose. Radical re-purposing. Art is critical to our capacity to innovate,
because it helps us to shift topics and themes to higher levels of abstraction, where we can make new connections or see new patterns of potential use.
We need to create situations where accidental encounter is possible, because that creates opportunity for exaptation. Non-linear, non-/less-structured approach needed.

complex system has enabling constraints, an ordered system has governing constraints. 
That is why heuristics are powerful in complex systems, because they enable you to act - people know what to do when the fixed plan breaks down, and they know what others
will likely do.

When rule breaking is exceptional, the person breaking the rules is usually paying attention. Dangerous accidents become likely when rule breaking becomes habitual.
We use heuristics to control uncertainty. Have a rule about when rules can be broken - it makes the system so much safer. Rule breaking kicks in in emergencies anyway, 
let's recognize we encounter micro-crises day to day.
